
                                          Abstract: Traditional statistical, physical, and correlation models for chaotic time series prediction
                                          have problems, such as low forecasting accuracy, computational time, and difficulty determining
                                          the neural network’s topologies. Over a decade, various researchers have been working with these
                                          issues; however, it remains a challenge. Therefore, this review paper presents a comprehensive
                                          review of significant research conducted on various approaches for chaotic time series forecasting,
                                          using machine learning techniques such as convolutional neural network (CNN), wavelet neural
                                          network (WNN), fuzzy neural network (FNN), and long short-term memory (LSTM) in the nonlinear
                                          systems aforementioned above. The paper also aims to provide issues of individual forecasting
                                          approaches for better understanding and up-to-date knowledge for chaotic time series forecasting.
                                          The comprehensive review table summarizes the works closely associated with the mentioned issues.
                                          It includes published year, research country, forecasting approach, application, forecasting parameters,
                                          performance measures, and collected data area in this sector. Future improvements and current
                                          studies in this field are broadly examined. In addition, possible future scopes and limitations are
                                          closely discussed.

                                          Keywords: chaos; forecasting; hydrological systems; neural networks; oil and gas; power and energy;
          
             1. Introduction

                                               The first section of this paper provides a brief description of the chaos and the prop-
                      erties of chaotic systems. In addition, the importance of chaotic time series forecasting in
                                          significant areas is addressed. Finally, this section covers the previous and current literature
 surveys on chaotic time series forecasting.

      1.1. Chaotic Systems
           The behavior of a nonlinear dynamical system that may be extremely sensitive to
 small changes in initial conditions is known as chaos. This sensitivity to initial conditions
 means that a slight change in the starting point can lead to different outcomes. For example,
                          the butterfly effect shows how a small change in one state of a deterministic nonlinear
                                          system may result in enormous deviations in a subsequent state [1]. The other characteristic
                                          of a chaotic system is no periodic behavior. The symmetric property of these nonlinear
                                          dynamic systems can play a vital role in producing the systems’ chaotic behavior. Due to

                                          this fact, various researchers have recently shown much interest in the symmetric properties

                                          of chaotic systems. In [2], the authors have proposed a chaotic oscillator with both odd

                                          and even symmetries. Similarly, some of the other applications of symmetric properties of

                                          chaotic systems lie in image processing, security, and communications [3]. The symmetric

                                          and asymmetric behavior has been observed in many natural phenomena. Due to these

                                          characteristics, the chaotic motion is difficult to forecast. For instance, predicting the

                                          butterfly effect for the long term is impossible [1]. This is because these systems are



                         deterministic, i.e., the future behavior of these systems is entirely defined by their initial
                         conditions. Hence, these systems are wholly deterministic and unpredictable.
                               On the other hand, a chaotic time series is generated when the variable changes with
                         time in a chaotic system. This chaotic time series provides extensive information about the
                         nonlinear system and helps evaluate and analyze the chaotic system’s behavior. The phase
                         space reconstruction technique reveals this dynamic information hidden in the chaotic time
                         series and transforms the existing data into a more describable framework [4]. As a result,
                         it is essential to have approaches that can forecast chaotic time series and differentiate
                         chaotic data from stochastic data [5–7]. The traditional prediction methods for this purpose
                         have failed to produce satisfactory performance. Thus, many advanced techniques using
                         machine learning-based approaches have been proposed recently. Therefore, this paper
                         presents a comprehensive review of the performance of traditional and machine learning-
                         based methods for chaotic time series forecasting and their implementation on nonlinear
                         dynamical systems, such as photovoltaic systems, wind farms, communication signals and
                         systems, oil and gas, hydrological systems, weather, and other systems.

                         1.2. Importance of Chaotic Time Series Forecasting
                               Forecasting is an approach for creating predictions to determine the direction of future
                         trends using historical data and current trend analysis as inputs [8]. Forecasting is the most
                         significant optimization concept related to energy savings, material savings, increasing
                         efficiency, making appropriate and suitable accurate decisions [8,9]. On the other hand,
                         chaos theory is an essential part of nonlinear science, developed in the 1970s [10]. Chaos is
                         a long-term non-periodic behavior in a predictable system with a high sensitivity to initial
                         conditions. It shows the order and regularity hidden behind disorganized and complex
                         occurrences. This tendency permeates and promotes many subjects. As a result, chaos
                         research has access to a solution. In the meantime, chaos theory applications are becoming
                         increasingly popular. They are significantly used in diverse scientific applications such as
                         wind farms [11], PV systems, oil and gas [12,13], hydrological systems [14], etc. A brief
                         description of the need for chaotic time series forecasting in each of these applications is
                         explained below.

                         1.2.1. Chaotic Time Series Forecasting in Power and Energy
                               Electricity demand and market price predictions have played a significant role in the
                         electric power industry for over a century [15]. Moreover, due to the worldwide energy
                         crisis and alarmingly rising air, water, and soil pollution levels, renewable energy has be-
                         come increasingly popular for power generation in recent years. This popularity is because
                         renewable energy is a pure and limitless energy source [11]. As a result, a rising number
                         of nations are becoming involved, and investors are committing to developing renewable
                         energy plants. However, the lack of consistent energy sources due to intermittent nature
                         represents renewable energies’ main problem. Thus, forecasting renewable generation
                         is the key to integrating these intermittent energies into the electricity grid for several
                         reasons [9,16]. The main advantage of predicting the intermittent nature of renewable
                         energy resources is that the number of backup systems can be reduced, thus, reducing the
                         investments and need for electricity to meet the demand. Many forecasting approaches
                         have been proposed using ANN, fuzzy, etc. These approaches are based entirely on time
                         series analysis in which the chaotic time series data of renewable energy are one of the
                         most challenging dynamics to be forecast.

                         1.2.2. Chaotic Time Series Forecasting in Oil and Gas
                              It is well known that the intake flow of a gasoline engine directly impacts the accuracy
                         of the air–fuel ratio management under transient situations [12]. As a result, precise control
                         becomes extremely difficult because the air ratio is far from stoichiometry for various
                         reasons. Thus, forecasting the engine’s intake flow with greater accuracy in less time can
                         improve the convergence rate. Additionally, it will be able to overcome the shortcomings of


                         the airflow sensor’s lag. This is because it allows an accurate forecast of the future airflow.
                         Similarly, it is also well known that there are abnormal fluctuations in the ventilation
                         air in the nonlinear coal mines’ ventilation systems [17]. These fluctuations in the air
                         are due to the mining depth and intensity gradually increasing and equipment aging.
                         The abnormalities, as mentioned earlier, can affect the entire system, resulting in various
                         underground accidents and lost coal mines’ ventilation system stability. Therefore, timely
                         air quality prediction in coal mines’ ventilation systems can help adequately manage
                         systems, which directly influences the safety and output of the coal mine.

                         1.2.3. Chaotic Time Series Forecasting in Hydrological Systems
                              Hydrological forecasting plays a critical role in reducing future flood impacts, also
                         helps produce more benefits for hydropower production, and enhances water resource
                         management [18]. It is worth noting that predicting the destiny of a river inflow is an
                         essential concern for water quality management [19].

                         1.2.4. Chaotic Time Series Forecasting in Other Systems
                              The distributed control system and information technology, which comprises supervi-
                         sory information technology and management information systems, are commonly used
                         technologies in thermal power plants [20]. The real-time data collected from power plant
                         equipment and personnel controls using these technologies are a chaotic time series. Fur-
                         ther, the instantaneous generator output power is critical to indicate the adjusting and
                         controlling equipment’s status. As a result, predicting the immediate generator power time
                         series could provide decision-making, maintenance, and incident-handling information.
                         Further, it positively impacts plant production, optimal operation, and problem detection
                         and maintenance technology.
                              Natural hazards, such as earthquakes, severe floods, fires, and volcanic eruptions,
                         and the destruction they create are worldwide issues that impose a high cost in terms of
                         human lives and financial damages [21]. The wireless sensor networks monitor the urban
                         river levels and other natural environmental conditions for predicting the floods before
                         they occur so that the people at risk evacuate in time.
                              Similarly, the nonlinear spacecraft system contains various fields with advanced
                         technology, and it has a significant impact on national economies, research, and technology.
                         Faults in the spacecraft system are challenging to detect and rectify. As a result, studying
                         the trend of spacecraft telemetry metrics and the variation law is essential for the early
                         prediction of spacecraft problems.

                         1.3. Previous and Current Literature Survey
                              Few reviews have focused on applying chaos theory in multiple applications. For in-
                         stance, in [14,22,23], a study on the application of the chaos concept in hydrology was
                         reported. The study also reveals some critical issues raised while applying the chaos
                         concept in hydrology. Similarly, a review of the application of chaos theory in traffic flow
                         patterns was reported in [24]. In both works, some of the reviewed methods reported for
                         the short-term forecasting are correlation dimension, Lyapunov exponent, Kolmogorov
                         entropy, SVM, ANN, nonlinear prediction, and dynamic neural network. These reviews
                         overlapped with elements of this field, though none have brought together all material
                         related to chaotic time series forecasting approaches using machine learning techniques for
                         various applications.
                              Considering the above research scope, the authors in this paper reviewed chaotic time
                         series forecasting approaches using machine learning techniques in various applications.
                         At first, the importance of chaotic time series forecasting is identified in multiple appli-
                         cations, including all the recently published methods, and addresses issues of individual
                         techniques. The review of these chaotic time series forecasting approaches in the past three
                         decades is summarized in Section 2. Section 3 gives a comprehensive review of machine-
                         learning-based chaotic time series forecasting approaches developed using ANN, FNN,


                                              WNN, and optimization algorithms. The study on forecasting various chaotic parameters
                                              in multiple applications is detailed in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the various perfor-
                                              mance measures used for chaotic time series forecasting approaches. Finally, Section 6
                                              concludes the current works, highlighting the shortcomings and suggesting possible future
                                              research perspectives.

                                              2. Review on Chaotic Time Series Forecasting
                                                    In the past three decades, many researchers have rigorously researched forecasting of
                                              chaos in various areas, such as wind farms, photovoltaic systems, hydrological systems,
                                              communication systems, and oil and gas fields, using ANN. Thus, there is a scope for a
                                              critical review of chaotic time series forecasting in various areas using machine learning
                                              techniques. This manuscript critically reviews various works published from 1992 to 2021.
                                              The decade-wise research contributions to chaotic time series forecasting during this period
                                              are shown in Figure 1.



                                       According to the literature review collected from Table 1, 43% of works have em-
                                 ployed the ANN-based approaches in the literature for chaotic time series forecasting.
                                 The additional techniques are based on the following: FNN 24%, optimization algorithms
                                 15%, WNN 6%, and other approaches 4%. In the 15% of optimization-algorithm-based
                                 techniques, the various algorithms used are GA, PSO, SSA, SA, SOM, CGO, GWO, CBAS,
                                 etc. The objective of these techniques is to improve accuracy, computational efficiency,
                                 and concerns due to the presence of uncertainties in various applications. Some novel
                                 techniques reported in Table 1 focused on efficiently tackling multiple objectives. Table 1
                                 also shows that these articles have dealt with several forecasting parameters, such as load,
                                 power, speed, traffic flow, signals, etc. In some of these works, real-time data were also
                                 collected from various countries, including Australia, Belgium, Canada, China, Iran, Laos,
                                 Morocco, Thailand, and the USA, as shown in Figure 2. In the first decade, research on
                                 chaotic time series forecasting relied on statistical data to forecast the system’s future behav-
                                 ior. The rest of the decades used artificial intelligence and other novel models for chaotic
                                 time series forecasting in various applications. The detailed analysis of various forecasting
                                 approaches in different applications is explained in the following sections.



                         3. Neural Network-Based Forecasting Approaches
                              As mentioned in Section 2, various researchers have developed ANN, FNN, WNN,
                         and optimization-based approaches for chaotic time series forecasting. The multiple tech-
                         niques developed using these approaches are shown in Figure 3. A detailed explanation of
                         these techniques, including the objectives and performance analysis, is presented under-
                         neath. The future scope of the method is also highlighted.
                                        Wavelet NN, Chaotic Wavelet NN         Wavelet Transform, Discrete Wavelet Transform
                                           Gaussian Particle Filter                      Backpropagation-ANN, Chaotic Backpropagation-ANN
                          Generalized Extended Kalman Filter                                     Chaotic-ANN, Chaotic-RBF-ANN
                           Polynomial Chaos Kalman Filter                                             CNN, Deep CNN
                               Unscented Kalman Filter                                                  Delay-based ANN
                                    GA, Improved GA,                                                      Elman-ANN, Elman-NARX-ANN
                              Temporal Difference GA                                                        Ensemble ANN
                         PSO, Adaptive PSO, Chaotic
                                                                      Neural Network-Based                   LSTM, RNN-LSTM
                         PSO, Chaotic Immune PSO,
                               Bee evolutionary PSO                     Chaos Forecasting                    MLP Network
                                                                          Approaches
                             SSA, CBAS, CGO, GWO,                                                            NARX-ANN
                                         MRFO, HBO
                                                                                                            RBF-ANN
                                 Simulated Annealing
                           SOM, AOA, TLBO, CCO, EDA                                                       RNN, Evolving RNN, Deep RNN,
                                                                                                          GRU-Deep RNN
                                      Self-Organizing FNN                                              Self-Organizing Map-ANN
                                   Repetitive Fuzzy Method
                                                                                                  Rough Set ANN
                                           LSTM-FNN CMAC-FNN
                             Dynamic Recurrent FNN Wavelet-based FNN                         Adaptive FNN, Adaptive RBF-FNN
                                                       Clustering-Based FNN           Chaotic FNN, Chaotic RBF-FNN

                         3.1. ANN-Based Forecasting Approaches
                               ANN has multiple perceptrons’ or nodes at each layer. For example, the network
                         with two input nodes, two hidden layers with four nodes in each, and one output node is
                         shown in Figure 4. This network can be called FFNN when its inputs are processed forward
                         (refer to the red dotted line in Figure 4). The FFNN is one of the most straightforward
                         neural networks, and it passes information in one direction through various input nodes
                         until the output node [178]. This type of neural network may or may not have hidden
                         layers, making its functioning more understandable. Some advantages of FFNN include
                         storing information on the entire network, working with incomplete knowledge, offering
                         tolerance, and having distributed memory. However, the disadvantages of FFNN include
                         having hardware dependency and unexplained behavior that can leave us tormented with
                         results. No particular rule for deciding the network’s structure and the appropriate network
                         structure is achieved through experience and trial and error.
                               BPNN is an essential mathematical tool for improving the accuracy of predictions in
                         data mining and machine learning. In FFNN, the network propagates forward to obtain
                         the output and compares it with real value to obtain the error. However, to minimize the
                         error, the BPNN will propagate backward by finding the error derivative for each weight
                         and then subtracting this value from the weight value. The architecture of a BPNN is also
                         shown in Figure 4, and the direction of propagation is shown in the green dotted line.
                         On the other hand, RNN is more complex than FFNN and BPNN. Here, the RNN’s every
                         node acts as a memory cell and continues the operations computation [4]. The RNN saves
                         the output of processing nodes and feeds them back into the network, and hence, they do
                         not pass the information in one direction only (refer to the blue dotted line in Figure 4).
                         If the network’s prediction is incorrect, the system self-learns and continually works toward
                         correcting the forecast during backpropagation.
                               Researchers have utilized ANNs in numerous applications to predict or forecast
                         various chaotic systems’ behavior. For instance, in [25], the researchers developed the


                         complex weighted neural network method for high-resolution adaptive bearing prediction.
                         It is observed that this concept is especially effective in circumstances where the hermit
                         matrix progressively changes over time due to adaptive tracking. Jae-Gyan Choi et al.
                         proposed the application of ANN in power systems for predicting the one-day-ahead
                         daily peak load based on chaotic time series data using absolute error as a performance
                         measure [26]. It is to be noted that the proposed technique can also be used for other
                         forecasting applications, such as predicting the special days, hourly load, temperature,
                         etc. In [27], the researchers have presented the RNN model for Mackey–Glass chaotic time
                         series. The proposed model’s experimental results are more practicable and effective in
                         making short-term predictions for chaotic time series than the multi-dimension embedding
                         phase space method.

                              Guichao Yang et al. developed a multilayer neural network adaptive control algorithm
                         for disturbance compensation in nonlinear systems. The work remarks that this devel-
                         oped algorithm can also be used simultaneously for nonlinear systems with mismatched
                         uncertainties. Additionally, an extended state observer was employed to estimate the
                         exogenous disturbance and predict the system’s state [179]. In extension, the authors pre-
                         sented the integration of a full-state feedback control algorithm, adaptive neural network,
                         and extended state observer to handle the unknown nonlinear dynamics and external
                         disturbances. In addition, the output feedback control algorithm was combined with an
                         adaptive neural network, extended state observer, and nonlinear disturbance observer
                         to estimate the unknown nonlinear dynamics, unmeasured states, and external distur-
                         bances [180]. In both works, a double-rod hydraulic servo system was chosen to validate
                         the two control schemes’ high-performance control effect. The authors also introduced a
                         neuroadaptive learning method for disturbance rejection in constrained nonlinear systems.
                         Moreover, the neural network adaptive control and the extended state observer to estimate
                         endogenous uncertainties and external disturbances in real time and correct them feed-
                         forwardly were presented in [181]. Further, the filtering problems and nonlinearity of the
                         input were accounted for by adding an auxiliary system. Finally, the overall closed-loop
                         stability was precisely ensured, and the accomplished control performance was validated
                         by real-time nonlinear systems application results.


                               Another forecasting method known as delay-based ANN for predicting the turbulent
                         flow temporal signals was proposed in [32]. These signals are obtained from a hot wire
                         anemometer at a single point inside the cylinder to detect coherent structures. In [34],
                         the authors presented the RBFNN model for forecasting the time series of the logistic map,
                         Henon map, Mackey–Glass, and Duffing’s systems. In [36], the researchers developed the
                         recurrent predictor neural network model for predicting the annual and monthly sunspot
                         time series. The experimental results of the proposed model are better than the Kalman
                         filter and universal learning network in terms of accuracy and RMSE. The authors of [39]
                         developed the KIII-chaotic neural network for forecasting the multistep time series data
                         on a benchmark system. In [40], the researchers presented the RNN for predicting the
                         electricity price of the power system. The work highlights that this approach is equally
                         relevant to Chinese electrical market data. In [43], the authors presented the RBFNN
                         model for forecasting the Henon map, Lorenz map, four real-time series discharge data,
                         and sea-surface temperature anomaly data collected from various rivers. The work remarks
                         that this presented model can also be used for geological time series. In [48], the authors
                         raised the time delay neural network method for predicting the future behavior of the solar
                         activity. In [51], the researchers demonstrated the BPNN to forecast the multistep nonlinear
                         time series of the diode resonator circuit. From the presented work, it is to be noted that
                         the approach can also be used in other chaotic time series.
                               Qian-Li Ma et al. presented the evolving RNN model for the Lorenz series, logistic,
                         Mackey–Glass, and real-world sunspots series [53]. The experimental results of the pro-
                         posed model showed to be better than the boosted RNN. Bao Rong Chang and Hsiu Fen
                         Tsai proposed an optimal BPNN model for time series of signal deviation in the stock mar-
                         ket [55]. The proposed method is based on SVM and AR models. The experimental results
                         of the proposed model showed better performance than the ARMA, RBFNN, and other
                         models in terms of MAD. In [57], the authors developed the NARX neural network model
                         for empirically predicting chaotic laser, variable bit rate, and video traffic time series of
                         real-world datasets. The simulation results of the developed model reliably performed
                         better than the Elman architectures. Further, the work highlights that this model can also
                         be used for electric load forecasting, financial time series, and signal processing tasks.
                               Yagang Zhang et al. developed an ANN model for predicting the stochastic generating
                         sequences in a chaotic unimodal dynamical system [58]. It is observed that the presented
                         strategy can also be further applicable for applications such as DNA-based groupings,
                         protein structure arrangement, and financial market time series. The authors of [61]
                         proposed an ensemble ANN model for forecasting the turning points in the Mackey–Glass
                         system. An expectation–maximization parameter learning algorithm for the developed
                         model was used for probability threshold prediction during the out-of-sample validation.
                         The experimental result from the system proves the viability of the proposed technique and
                         shows better results than the ANN model alone. In [68], the work presented the RBFNN
                         model to predict the Shanghai Composite index that is chaotic according to the phase
                         diagram analysis. The proposed technique’s experimental results are better than the BPNN.
                         In [78], the hybrid Elman–NARX neural network model is presented to chaotic systems,
                         such as Mackey–Glass, Lorenz equations, and the real-life sunspot time series, for predicting
                         the chaotic time series. The proposed method has performed more effectively and accurately
                         than the AR model, GA, and fuzzy methods. Gao Shuang et al. presented the rough set
                         neural network model for long-term wind power prediction [80]. The experimental results
                         show that the rough set method has the least NMAE compared to the other three methods,
                         the chaos neural network model, persistence model, and rough set neural network model.
                         Another forecasting method for gas emission rate prediction, known as the global method
                         based on the BPNN, was proposed in [83]. The proposed model showed good accuracy
                         and stability predictions than the first-order weighted local prediction method. In [84],
                         the researchers developed the chaotic RBFNN method for predicting the power systems’
                         short-term load. The results of the proposed method showed promising results better than
                         conventional RBFNN. In [12], a chaos RBFNN method was presented for forecasting the


                         gasoline engine intake flow’s transient condition. The simulation results showed more
                         accuracy compared to conventional RBFNN.
                              In [101], the application of ANN in a chaotic dynamical system for forecasting embed-
                         ded dimension and robust location was presented. In [103], the selecting and combining
                         models with the SOM neural network model for long-term chaotic time series prediction
                         from the Mackey–Glass equation, NN5 tournament, AR model, and sine function were
                         presented. It is to be noted that this model can be used to assess the selected outcomes of the
                         modeling techniques by considering the best-predicted SMAPE. In [21], the MLP model for
                         enhancing the accuracy of a flood prediction through machine learning and chaos theory
                         was presented. The experimental results of the proposed method performed better than
                         the Elman-RNN method. It is to be noted that this concept is also applicable to sensors,
                         allowing for more individual action in severe conditions. Further, the idea can also lower
                         the system’s total operational costs and ensure next-generation power grids’ effective and
                         reliable functioning. In [182], the authors developed a hybrid machine learning technique
                         for forecasting the time series of NN5 using the nearest trajectory model, one-year-cycle
                         model, and neural network. In [128], the self-adaptive chaotic BPNN algorithm was pro-
                         posed based on Chebyshev’s chaotic map for predicting the electrical power system’s
                         load. The presented algorithm results showed better global optimization performance than
                         conventional BPNN, RBFNN, and Elman networks. The work highlights that the chaotic
                         neural network regression using the probability density forecast method can predict the
                         electricity demand. In [131], the deep CNN model was proposed for forecasting Lyapunov
                         exponents from observed time series in discrete dynamical systems. In [157], the authors
                         presented the RNN-based LSTM model to predict the mutation rate in a human body
                         affected by COVID-19. The proposed approach can be extended further by inserting and
                         deleting mutation rates in the model.
                              The authors of [162] presented the Deep CNN model using meteorological data to
                         forecast flight delays. The results of Deep CNN showed to be better than the CNN,
                         which is proven in terms of weight gradient error and hidden layer error. The authors
                         of [168] presented the LSTM neural network model to forecast the delay time in a chaotic
                         optical system and compared the model with the delayed mutual information method
                         and autocorrelation function method. It is worth noting that the proposed model can also
                         enhance the security and maturity of optical chaos secure communications. In [183],
                         the authors presented a LSTM-based forecasting model by integrating ensemble and
                         reinforcement learning techniques. Further, an adaptive gradient algorithm was used to
                         train the network and validated on the Lorenz, Duffing, and Rössler systems. The authors
                         of [184] developed a FFNN-based prediction model to estimate the change in future state
                         values of a Rössler system. In [169], the authors presented a gate recurrent unit-based Deep
                         RNN model to forecast time series of three chaotic systems, (i) Lorenz, (ii) Rabinovich–
                         Fabrikant, and (iii) Rössler, which showed better performance than the LSTM-based Deep
                         RNN model. This model can also be used for real-time applications to predict the hyper-
                         turbulent frameworks to control the turbulence or synchronize the framework model.

                         3.2. Fuzzy with ANN-Based Forecasting Approaches
                              FNN is a hybrid network developed using ANN’s learning ability and fuzzy logic’s
                         noise handling capability. The architecture of the FNN is also shown in Figure 4. The figure
                         shows that the network has four layers: the input layer, fuzzification layer, inference layer,
                         and defuzzification layer (refer to the yellow dotted lines in Figure 4). FNN uses two
                         approaches, namely (i) Mamdani and (ii) Takagi and Sugeno. Fuzzy logic is represented
                         using the neural network’s structure and trained using either a BP or an optimization
                         algorithm. The FNN is implemented in the following three ways:
                         •    Real inputs with fuzzy weights;
                         •    Fuzzy inputs with real weights;
                         •    Fuzzy inputs and fuzzy weights.


                               In [50], the authors developed the self-organizing Takagi and Sugeno-type FNN model
                         for predicting the short-term traffic flow. The experimental results of the developed model
                         showed to be feasible and more effective than RBFNN. In [54], the researchers developed
                         the distributed chaotic fuzzy RBFNN method applied to fault section estimation in the
                         distribution network. The simulation results of the developed strategy achieved better
                         efficiency, learning ability, fault-tolerance, and low convergence rates than the BPNN model.
                         On the other hand, in [66], the work presented a subtractive clustering-based FNN for
                         forecasting the traffic flow and used the GA for deciding the clustering radius. Ding
                         Guan-bin and Ding Jia-Feng introduced an adaptive neural network-based fuzzy inference
                         system for predicting the monthly average flow in a hydrological station, which showed
                         better results than the AR model [67]. The authors of [69] developed the fuzzy descriptor
                         model integrated with singular spectrum analysis for predicting the various time series,
                         including Mackey–Glass, Lorenz, Darwin sea level pressure, and the disturbance storm
                         time index. The presented model results showed to be better than the MLP and RBFNN
                         models. Another forecasting method known as the FNN model based on chaos theory
                         for predicting the hydraulic pumps’ vibration signal was proposed in [75]. It is to be
                         noted that this model can also be used to improve prediction accuracy by readjusting the
                         minimal embedding dimension optimally. The dynamic recurrent FNN model used to
                         predict the power systems’ short-term load was developed in [76]. It was proved that the
                         developed model’s convergence rate and forecasting accuracy are enhanced compared to
                         the conventional FNN model. In [97], the researchers presented the interval type-2 fuzzy
                         cerebellar model articulation controller for forecasting the Henon system of chaotic time
                         series and the chaos synchronization of the Duffing–Holmes system. The proposed model
                         of simulation results showed to be better than the FNN and interval type-2 FNN.
                               In [104], the researchers proposed the saliency back-emf-based wavelet FNN model
                         for a torque observer, using a new maximum torque per ampere control for forecasting the
                         speed of a sensorless interior permanent magnet synchronous motor. In [110], the authors
                         presented the embedding theorem-repetitive fuzzy method for predicting the time series
                         data of Mackey–Glass, Lorenz, and sunspot numbers. The proposed model’s experimental
                         results provided better forecasting than the simple fuzzy, adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference
                         and other models in terms of error indices. Qinghai Li and Rui-Chang Lin presented
                         the self-constructing recurrent FNN model for forecasting the logistic and Henon time
                         series [112]. The proposed model had a worthier performance in convergence rate and
                         forecasting accuracy than the self-constructing FNN. The authors of [117] presented the
                         interactively recurrent fuzzy functions model for predicting the time series data of Lorenz,
                         Mackey–Glass, and real-time lung sound signal modeling. The benchmark and real-time
                         models’ results showed to be better than the recurrent networks, such as fuzzy WNN,
                         self-evolving FNN, ESN, and LS. Luo Chao and Wang Haiyue presented the application of
                         •    Generalized zonary time-variant fuzzy information granule;
                         •    LSTM mechanism with FNN model.
                               For Zurich monthly sunspot numbers, Mackey–Glass time series, and daily maximum
                         temperatures in Melbourne were used for predicting the granules [141]. The results of
                         the proposed methods showed better performance than the AR and nonlinear AR neural
                         network models. In [176], the researchers presented the adaptive RBFNN model for fore-
                         casting the online vehicle velocity, showing better prediction accuracy and computational
                         efficiency than the LSTM, NARX, and deep neural network models.

                         3.3. Optimization Algorithms with ANN-Based Forecasting Approaches
                              The authors of [29] developed the temporal difference GA-based reinforcement learn-
                         ing neural network model to predict and control two chaotic systems, i.e., the Henon map
                         and the logistic map. The advantage of the proposed concept is that it can apply directly to
                         control chaotic physical systems in real-world models. Mohammad Farzad et al. proposed
                         the GA for forecasting the Mackey–Glass chaotic time series, and the model showed better


                         performance than the ANN and polynomials methods [47]. The proposed model may also
                         be used to forecast any other chaotic systems. In [71], a modified bee evolution using a
                         PSO-based chaotic neural network model was presented to predict the load in the power
                         system. The proposed model’s simulation results showed better outcomes than the PSO
                         algorithm used to develop the power system’s proper planning and has good prospects.
                         In [96], a hybrid approach using the chaotic self-adaptive PSO algorithm and BPNN was
                         presented to forecast the polymers’ gas solubility. The proposed model is reliable, accurate,
                         and practicable for analyzing and designing polymer processing technology, compared to
                         PSO-tuned BPNN models. It is to be noted that the proposed approach can also be further
                         extended to tackle actual difficulties. The chaotic PSO tuned ANN model was presented
                         in [102] to forecast air quality by predicting the particulate concentration. It is to be noted
                         that this model can also be used to prove the meteorological condition of wind speed, which
                         has a significant effect at urban intersections for specific matter concentrations. In [107],
                         the researchers developed the improved GA for forecasting the synchronous parameters of
                         chaotic time series to achieve higher accuracy and efficiency than GA alone.
                               The authors of [115] proposed the modified BPNN based on chaotically optimized GA
                         and simulated annealing algorithms to forecast electrical energy demand in a smart grid. It
                         is to be noted that this concept can also be relevant to lowering the system’s total operational
                         costs and ensuring the effective and reliable functioning of next-generation power grids.
                         Akhmad Faqih et al. developed the extreme learning mechanism using RBFNN and SOM
                         models to predict the multistep ahead time series of Lorenz’s chaotic system [133]. It is
                         to be noted that this proposed model can also combine with several behaviors to provide
                         the best behavior. In [135], the researcher presented the GA and LS-based SVM method to
                         control fractional-order systems, which achieved better effectiveness and feasibility than
                         the conventional LS-based SVM. The authors of [139] proposed the principal component
                         analysis using the chaotic immune PSO tuned GRNN for forecasting the corrosion of
                         circulating cooling water in a petrochemical enterprise. The approach achieved better
                         forecasting accuracy and convergence speed than the traditional PSO-tuned GRNN model.
                         The advantage of the proposed model is that it can also be employed to forecast other
                         nonlinear systems. In [147], the authors proposed the chaotic PSO algorithm for predicting
                         the mobile location and achieved better location accuracy and faster convergence rate
                         than such algorithms as those of Chan, Taylor, and PSO. Ji Jin et al. developed the fractal
                         dimension-based EMD method and GA tuned BPNN model for predicting the wind speed
                         in wind farms by considering the atmospheric motions’ fractal feature [152]. The proposed
                         models showed better performance than LSTM, GA tuned BPNN, and ensemble EMD-
                         GA-BPNN. It is to be observed that this model can also require further study to optimize
                         the computational time. It is also necessary to analyze the model on various time scales
                         to decide the proposed models’ suitability to wind speed series on any timescale. Happy
                         Aprillia et al. proposed the SSA tuned CNN for predicting the short-term power of PV
                         systems [158]. The presented algorithm’s results showed better accuracy than the SSA
                         tuned SVM and LSTM methods. Further, the work highlights that this proposed model can
                         also address uncertainty, particularly for wet weather, heavy overcast weather, peak time,
                         and forecasting on typhoon days. Shuzhi Gao et al. developed the soft sensor model using
                         the CBAS algorithm and Elman neural networks to forecast the conversion rate of vinyl
                         chloride monomer [171]. The developed model’s performance can be extended by utilizing
                         the deep neural network approaches.

                         3.4. Wavelet NN-Based Forecasting Approaches
                              The merits of wavelet and neural networks are hybridized to form a new WNN to
                         achieve better forecasting ability. WNNs have been used with great success in a wide range
                         of applications. In some applications, it was proven that if the combination of a neural
                         network and wavelet is used, the proposed model’s efficiency is increased. The WNN
                         architecture also follows the same fashion as the network shown in Figure 4. However,

                         in the hidden layer, wavelet basis functions are used as activation functions instead of the
                         conventional function of the FFNN.
                                Antonis K. Alexandridis et al. proposed machine learning algorithms, namely wavelet
                         network and genetic programming, for forecasting the average temperature precisely when
                         it comes to weather derivative pricing, compared to SVM and RBF [185]. Wei Wu et al.
                         developed a WNN model for electricity-based chaotic time series data to predict the spot
                         market prices [38]. In [45], the researchers proposed the WNN model and compared it with
                         the BPNN model for single-step forecasting of Lorenz and Mackey–Glass chaotic time series.
                         It is to be noted that this approach can be extended further to be used for real-world chaotic
                         data. In [74,81], the authors proposed the forecasting models for wind farms. The wavelet
                         decomposition method and ITSM in [74] showed an improved accuracy compared to ANN
                         in predicting wind speed and power. Similarly, the developed hybrid algorithm using
                         wavelet transform, chaotic theory, and grey model in [81] showed better prediction than
                         the direct prediction method. The models in [74,81] can be further optimized and applied
                         in various countries’ wind farms, such as the Dongtai wind farm in China. Bo Zhou and
                         Aiguo Shi presented the phase space reconstruction-based WNN method to predict Henon
                         and Lorenz’s chaotic time series [95]. The significant benefit of this proposed method
                         over a WNN is the improvement in SMAPE. It is to be noted that this concept can also
                         help optimize the process parameters and the execution time during the simulation. Tian
                         Zhongda et al. presented the wavelet transform and multiple model fusion for forecasting
                         the Lorenz and Mackey–Glass time series and achieved more effective performance in
                         terms of SMAPE [120]. The models can be applied to real-world chaotic systems, such
                         as geomagnetic series, network traffic series, etc. In [130], the ANN-discrete wavelet
                         transform method was presented for forecasting the photovoltaic system’s power based on
                         chaos theory. The significant benefit of this method over the ANN and ANN-phase space
                         reconstruction is the improvement in the Theil index.

                         3.5. Other Approaches
                              The authors of [56] developed the generalized EKF for forecasting the Lorenz time
                         series with various Bernoulli distribution probabilities, which achieved an acceptable
                         prediction precision and good robustness. Xue-dong Wu et al. proposed the GPF and
                         compared it with UKF and EKF to forecast the Mackey–Glass time series [73]. In [106],
                         the researchers proposed the EKF-based MPSV method to estimate the transmitted signal
                         in power line communications and confirmed the better efficiency than the inverse filter-
                         based MPSV method. However, the real-time validation of the proposed approach is the
                         research gap. In [129], the authors developed the equivalent model using EKF to predict
                         the state of charge in power Li-ion batteries. Yijun Xu et al. proposed the polynomial chaos-
                         based Kalman filter to predict the nonlinear system dynamics [146]. In [160], the authors
                         presented the UKF for forecasting the parameters of the gray-box model for dynamic EEG
                         system modeling and achieved the lowest RMSE compared to the particle filter and EKF.

                         4. Forecasting of Chaotic Time Series in Various Applications
                              As mentioned in Table 1, various parameters have been forecast in multiple ap-
                         plications using the machine learning-based approaches detailed in Section 3. The list
                         of these forecasting parameters categorized into the different applications is given in
                         Figure 5. The detailed description of these forecasting parameters using various approaches
                         in various fields is explained underneath.

                         4.1. Power and Energy
                              This section describes power and energy forecasting techniques, using various chaotic
                         time series approaches applied in wind farms, solar, photovoltaic systems, etc.
                         4.1.1. Wind Farms
                              Many applications of wind power and speed forecasting approaches have been devel-
                         oped based on chaotic characteristics or chaotic time series and applied on various wind
                         farms. For instance, the statistical type of forecasting approaches for predicting wind power,
                         speed, and load for short-term and long-term wind power, speed, and load prediction in
                         Beijing in China are as follows:
                         •         ITSM with wavelet decomposition method [74];
                         •         SVM [16];
                         •         Rough set neural network [80];
                         •         BFA tuned double-reservoir ESN [166].
                             The approaches, as mentioned earlier, showed good short-term and long-term per-
                         formance, but the computational complexity is high to complete the task. Similarly, many
                         other works have been attempted to predict weather conditions for wind farms whose
                         operations are more complex.
                             Various researchers have proposed hybrid prediction methods to enhance accuracy.
                         These approaches were made by integrating the following:
                         •         Wavelet transforms with chaotic time series and grey model [81];
                         •         Hilbert–Huang transforms with Hurst analysis [108];
                         •         Hybrid neuro evolutionary [175].
                              The hybrid approaches mentioned above with multistep chaotic characteristics were
                         validated for short-term forecasting of wind power at the Dongtai wind farm and Hebei
                         province in the east of China. The work highlights that EMD-based combined forecast-
                         ing methods can improve short-term forecasting accuracy based on their characteristics.
                         The surrogate data technique and spectral analysis methods are applied to forecast wind
                         wave height, period, and direction for three-hourly chaotic time series from three stations
                         in the Caspian’s southern, central, and northern parts of the sea [109]. The hybrid approach
                         developed using ensemble EMD-sample entropy and the full parameters continued frac-
                         tion model were developed for predicting the wind power of farm location at Xinjiang,
                         China [119]. Moreover, the Markov chain switching regime model developed in [144]
                         used hourly, short-term, and long-term chaotic time series data for predicting wind speed
                         and direction of the farm located at Bonneville Power Administration control area in the
                         Northwest USA. It is to be noted that these proposed approaches can also be used for the


                         proper planning and scheduling of wind power. The self-adaptive and artificial intelligence
                         type forecasting techniques for predicting the wind speed are as follows:
                         •    Fractal dimension-Lorenz stenflo-Ensemble EMD;
                         •    GA tuned BPNN model;
                         •    Empirical dynamical model [152,165].
                              For short-term prediction of wind speed considers the atmospheric motion and fractal
                         feature at Abbotsford in Canada, and Kansas and Missouri in the USA. It is to be noted
                         that better results can be generated using exogenous variables in the ANN approach.

                         4.1.2. Solar and Photovoltaic Systems
                              The recurrent predictor neural network model presented in [36] is based on an ex-
                         tended algorithm of self-adaptive BP through a time learning algorithm for predicting the
                         annual sunspot time series in Skylab. Similarly, the time-delay neural network model [48]
                         and the multi-layered neural network-based co-evolutionary algorithm [52] are used for
                         predicting the annual sunspot time series of the space laboratory launched by the USA in
                         1973 and the sunspot index data center in Belgium, respectively. The ANN-based discrete
                         transform using chaos theory [130], ensemble EMD based on optimized chaotic phase
                         space reconstruction [155], SSA tuned CNN [158], and CGO [172] are used for predicting
                         the power, voltage, and current of PV system in Beni Mellal, Morocco, St Lucia campus
                         PV station, Australia. The k-fold cross-validation with GRNN reported in [134] is used
                         for predicting the accuracy of sunspot under different embedding dimensions for phase
                         space reconstruction of chaotic time series according to the Takens theorem in the Solar
                         Influences Data Analysis Center, Belgium.

                         4.1.3. Other Power Systems
                               Under certain circumstances, chaos in an electrical power system can show abnormal
                         oscillations, threatening the electrical grid’s reliability and stability. Because of the nonlin-
                         earities of electricity networks, chaos theory is a high priority. Hence, the application of
                         chaos theory and several forecasting approaches to improve the accuracy and reliability of
                         load forecasting. The proposed forecasting approaches for predicting the electrical daily
                         peak load of the power systems, such as South Korea Electric Power Corporation, Daqing
                         oilfield company in China, New South Wales in Australia, and North China city, are as
                         follows:
                         •    ANN [26];
                         •    Bee evolution modifying PSO tuned chaotic neural network [71];
                         •    Adding-weighted LLE [72];
                         •    Dynamic recurrent FNN [76];
                         •    Chaotic RBFNN [84];
                         •    Chaotic local weighted linear forecast algorithm based on angle cosine [88].
                              The self-adaptive chaotic BPNN and parallel chaos algorithm reported in [128],
                         and [118], respectively, are used for forecasting the short-term electrical power load in
                         the China network. The limitations of the proposed approaches are eliminated with the
                         application of hybridized chaotic RBFNN-quantile regression model for forecasting the
                         weather, seasons, wind power, and electricity price. The hybrid forecasting approaches
                         developed for predicting the dynamic characteristics of electricity are the wavelet decompo-
                         sition methodology [120], variational mode decomposition-maximum relevance minimum
                         redundancy based BPNN-LS-SVM [156], and short- and medium-term load in the Xi’an
                         power grid corporation, China.
                              Short-term electricity price forecasting has become crucial in the power markets, as it
                         allows for the foundation for market participants’ profit maximization. The proposed
                         methods for forecasting the short-term electricity spot market prices and the marginal price
                         at the New England and California electricity markets in the USA are as follows:

                         •    Nonlinear auto-correlated chaotic model-based WNN [38];
                         •    RNN [40];
                         •    LS-SVM algorithm [60];
                         •    Add-weighted one-rank multi-steps prediction model [63].
                              The generation companies can decide on scheduling generators and provide high-
                         quality power services to customers. Thus, the validation algorithm presented in [93]
                         is based on the voltage sensor applied to a DC zonal shipboard electric power system,
                         using decentralized polynomial chaos theory for the sensor validation decentralized state
                         prediction. In addition, it is to be reported that the presented conventional algorithms were
                         improved using artificial intelligence techniques. The independent component analysis
                         method reported in [94] for predicting the amplitude and frequency of highly chaotic
                         distorted power system signals is presented based on duffing oscillator solutions. The pro-
                         posed approach can be used for the real-time control and measurement of the fundamental
                         frequency of a power system while focusing mainly on chaotic disturbances. The maxi-
                         mum velocity criterion method, sinusoidal wave frequency modulation, and chaotic control
                         algorithm are for forecasting the chaos and suppressing the predicted chaos to increase
                         the security for cyber–physical power systems [112]. The modified BPNN, chaos-search
                         GA, and SA algorithms are applied to predict a smart grid’s short-term electrical energy
                         demand in New South Wales, Australian grid [115]. The proposed approach can also lower
                         the system’s total operational costs and ensure the next-generation power grids’ effective
                         and reliable functioning. The polynomial chaos expansion-based Langevin Markov chain
                         Monte Carlo and multi fidelity-surrogate-based Bayesian inference via adaptive importance
                         sampling predict decentralized dynamic parameters, such as inertia, exciter gains, damping
                         ratio, and the droop of the synchronous generator in New England, USA [138,151].

                         4.2. Hydrological Systems
                               The RBFNN model is developed to estimate the Mekong River’s nonlinear hydrologi-
                         cal time series in Thailand and Laos, the Chao Phraya River in Thailand, and sea-surface
                         temperature anomaly data [43]. In addition, the presented approach can also be applied
                         to other geological time series. In [67], an adaptive fuzzy inference-based neural network
                         model is developed to predict the medium- and long-term hydrological residual time
                         series. The data are collected from the Guantai hydrological station, Zhang River, China.
                         An empirical, statistical, and chaotic nonlinear dynamic model in [19] was applied to
                         forecast the stream water temperature from the available solar radiation and air temper-
                         ature in the Lake Tahoe basin, California, Nevada, USA. The chaotic FNN for predicting
                         the hydraulic pump’s vibration signal was presented in [75]. It is to be reported that the
                         proposed approach can be extended further to improve prediction accuracy by readjusting
                         the minimal embedding dimension optimally. The coupled quantity–pattern similarity
                         model reported in [18] predicts the monthly precipitation of hydrological systems in the
                         Danjiangkou reservoir basin, China. The proposed approach can also be applied to time
                         series with various lead time scales.

                         4.3. Communication Signals and Systems
                              The complex weighted neural network algorithm in [25] solves the principal com-
                         ponent analysis problem and high-resolution adaptive bearing prediction. The proposed
                         approach is especially effective in circumstances where the hermit matrix progressively
                         changes over time due to adaptive tracking. The BPNN tuned SVM grey model in [55] is
                         used for forecasting the signal deviation time series. The anchor selection method is based
                         on polynomial chaos expansions [86] for angle-of-arrival prediction-based positioning sys-
                         tems. The chaos algorithm in [92] is proposed for forecasting the radio wave propagation
                         in the ionosphere. The proposed algorithm can also forecast a set of radio transmission
                         signals at a fading amplitude time series location. The phase space reconstruction-LS-SVM
                         in [98] is developed to predict FM radio’s band occupancy rate in German Rohde, Schwarz
                         company, and fixed radio monitoring station of Xihua University, USA. The proposed ap-


                         proach can be extended further to improve multistep time series prediction. The minimum
                         phase-space volume-EKF equalization method presented in [106] is for forecasting the
                         chaos in power line communications. The LLE, Higuchi’s fractal dimension, and sample
                         entropy techniques are used for predicting the fractals, chaos, and parametric entropy
                         features of surface electromyography signals during dynamic contraction of biceps muscles
                         under a varying load [127]. The proposed process can also be helpful in physiotherapy
                         and athletic biomechanics for testing muscular fitness. A deterministic chaotic sequences
                         method is developed to forecast quadrature baseband signals and orthogonal frequency
                         division multiplexing-based cognitive radio channel [137]. The proposed approach can also
                         be applicable to bit error rate performance, which is projected to improve if an appropriate
                         power management method is used.

                         4.4. Oil and Gas
                              The global prediction method uses a BPNN model for forecasting the gas emission rate
                         in the Hegang Nanshan mine located in China [83]. The proposed model showed better
                         step, accuracy, and stability predictions. The improved Duffing oscillator chaotic traffic
                         prediction model in [85] was developed for coal gas’ traffic flow prediction for a coal mine.
                         The proposed approach can also increase signal detection accuracy. The chaos RBFNN
                         method in [12] predicts the intake airflow of the gasoline engine. The coal mine ventilation
                         systems’ management technology reported in [17] can predict the gas concentration in
                         Jining, Shandong, China. As a result, the system can provide reliable assurance for mine
                         safety production.

                         4.5. Other Systems
                              The multistep time series prediction in diode resonator circuits is made by integrating
                         the nonlinear signal prediction method with a BPNN [51]. The proposed approach can be
                         extended further to be used in other chaotic time series. The integration of nonlinear time
                         series analysis and backpropagation MLP for multistep nonlinear time series forecasting
                         of chaotic diode resonator circuits was reported in [59]. The distributed chaotic fuzzy
                         RBFNN is exploited for distributed network fault section prediction [54]. The global
                         prediction of chaos method forecasts the chaotic instantaneous generator output power
                         in Liaoning province in China [20]. The chaotic adding-weight dynamic local predict
                         model predicts the pseudo-random number generator of the initial sequence number in
                         the transmission control protocol stack [62]. The chaos-based Rivest Shamir Adleman
                         algorithm and chaos-based random number generator forecast the security vulnerabilities
                         of the cryptosystem [142].

                         5. Performance Measures
                               This section discusses the various performance measures used for chaotic time series
                         forecasting approaches. According to the literature review summary in Table 1, it can be
                         concluded that there are many approaches for chaotic time series forecasting. However, it is
                         challenging to choose one proposed method that performs better based on the performance
                         measures. Table 1 also shows that the researchers have evaluated the performance of
                         the forecasting approach using various statistical errors. The different classifications of
                         statistical performance measures used for chaotic time series forecasting are mean, relative,
                         percentage, prediction, and coefficients. The classification and its subcategories are shown
                         in Figure 6. The formula for computing these performance measures is demonstrated in
                         Figure 7. In Figure 7, n denotes the number of samples, and Ya,i and Yp,i are the actual and
                         predicted outputs by the chaotic time series forecasting model. Further, Ȳa , and Ȳp are the
                         averages of Ya,i and Yp,i .


                                                                  As shown in Figures 6 and 7, most of the performance measures used for chaotic time
                                                             series forecasting are mean errors. Further, the review summary in Table 1 shows that MSE
                                                             and its variants are the most widely used performance measures for chaotic time series
                                                             forecasting. The MSE and its variants measure the error between Ya and Yp , and the closest
                                                             value to zero indicates a better estimation of the forecasting approach [186,187]. After mean
                                                             errors, the percentage errors are the second most used performance measure for chaotic
                                                             time series forecasting. The percentage errors measure the percentage error between Ya
                                                             and Yp . The closer values of percentage error to zero also indicate a better estimation of
                                                             the forecasting approach. On the other hand, the coefficient of determination R2 is most
                                                             widely used to indicate the forecasting approach’s predictive ability in fitting the actual


                         data Ya [188,189]. Thus, the values of R2 range from zero to one, and the value equal to 1.0
                         indicates a perfect fit. The summary in Table 1 also shows that most of the researchers used
                         a combination of different performance measures for evaluating the forecasting approach.
                         The combinations are MAE, MAPE, and RMSE; MSE, MAPE, and RMSE; MAE and RMSE;
                         MSE and RMSE; R2 and MSE; R and MSE, etc.

                         6. Conclusions
                              This article reviewed various approaches for chaotic time series forecasting based
                         on machine learning in multiple areas, such as wind farms, PV systems, hydrological
                         systems, communication signals and systems, oil and gas, and other systems. At the
                         beginning of this paper, the chaotic system/time series and the importance of chaos
                         forecasting were introduced. Next, the various machine learning-based chaotic time series
                         forecasting approaches were presented. These approaches use WNN, FNN, CNN, LSTM,
                         and Markov chain models. Then, a review of the prediction of various parameters in
                         multiple applications using machine learning-based techniques is presented. This review
                         concludes that traditional prediction methods can hardly obtain satisfactory results. Hence,
                         many chaotic time series prediction methods were developed using machine learning-based
                         approaches, which enhanced their efficiency and accuracy.

                         6.1. Findings
                             This review summarizes the findings of various approaches developed for multiple
                         applications as follows:
                         •    The wavelet decomposition method predicted wind speed and power accurately and
                              effectively using improved time series, chaotic time series, and grey models [74,81].
                              The false nearest neighbor analysis method forecast the chaotic behavior of the wind–
                              wave characteristics, including wave period and height [109].
                         •    Hilbert–Huang transform and Hurst analysis is a proper choice to forecast the multi-
                              scale chaotic characteristics of wind power [108]. In contrast, ensemble EMD and full
                              parameters continued fraction is appropriate for predicting wind power’s nonlinear
                              chaotic time series [119].
                         •    The empirical dynamic model presented in [165] forecast the wind speed for various
                              height levels. At the same time, the fractal dimensional-based self-adaptive model for
                              wind speed predicted atmospheric motion and fractal features [152].
                         •    The approaches such as the ordinary least square method [28], recurrent predictor
                              neural network [36], hybrid Elman–NARX neural network [78], and embedding
                              theorem-repetitive fuzzy [21] forecast the sunspot number (chaotic time series) effec-
                              tively. In all these cases, the sunspot data were collected from the world data center
                              for Belgium’s sunspot index.
                         •    The combination of chaos theory and techniques, such as ensemble EMD and CNN-
                              SSA, effectively forecast the PV system’s output power under certain conditions, such
                              as rainy, heavy cloudy, lightly cloudy, and sunny conditions [155,158]. The data were
                              collected from the St Lucia campus PV station, Australia, in all these cases.
                         •    The integration of the BPNN with GA, SA algorithms [115], parallel chaos [118],
                              wavelet decomposition-based methods [120,157] was successfully used to forecast the
                              deregulated power system’s short-term electrical energy demand. These methods
                              help in proper economic power dispatching with an enhanced demand response that
                              assists in efficient spot price-fixing in the deregulated power market.
                         •    The regression analysis models using ANN and chaotic nonlinear dynamic [73] and
                              coupled quantity-pattern similarity [18] were validated to predict the stream water
                              temperature and monthly precipitation.
                         •    The minimum phase space-based EKF method was used to forecast the blind equal-
                              ization in power line communication systems to overcome channel noise [106].



                         •    The response surface-based Bayesian inference [149] and PCE-based hybrid MCMC [163]
                              approaches were used to predict the generator’s dynamic parameters, such as inertia,
                              exciter gains, damping ratio, and droop.
                         •    The independent component analysis method in [94] adequately estimated the ampli-
                              tude and frequency of power systems’ highly distorted signals to avoid the ferroreso-
                              nance effect.
                         •    The Markov chain switching regime model enhanced the precision accuracy and is
                              helpful for wind power forecasting during scheduling and planning [144].

                         6.2. Future Directions
                              This comprehensive review helped open up new scopes in the field of chaotic time
                         series forecasting approaches in various applications and is highlighted underneath.

                         •    Chaotic time series analysis and SVM can estimate short-term wind speeds while con-
                              sidering weather conditions and more complex scenarios of wind farm operations [16].
                         •    To the dispersed power resource system, the wind power generation unit can be
                              connected to the grid of this system through high-quality forecasting of the parameters
                              using the Jacobian matrix estimate method and weather data optimal points using
                              deterministic chaos [104].
                         •    EMD-based forecasting approaches can increase short-term wind power prediction
                              accuracy based on their behavior characteristics. Furthermore, the relationship be-
                              tween different scale subsequences and numerical weather forecasting can improve
                              the accuracy of this short-term wind power forecasting [108].
                         •    The hybrid neuro evolutionary approach, i.e., adaptive variational mode decomposition-
                              AOA-LSTM proposed for wind farms, has employed multiple outlier identification
                              methods with optimization and decomposition procedures to improve forecasting
                              outcomes [175]. This method can also be adaptable to other geographies.
                         •    The independent component analysis method can be extended for real-time monitor-
                              ing and controlling the power system’s fundamental frequency with an appropriate
                              time delay between observed data frames [94].
                         •    The precision accuracy of the response surface-based Bayesian inference method
                              proposed for the power systems to predict the dynamic parameters has to be improved
                              when there is a substantial outrageous deviation in the boundaries [149].
                         •    The coupled quantity pattern similarity model proposed for the prediction of monthly
                              precipitation can also be applied to the time series with different lead time scales [18].
                         •    The hybrid algorithms proposed using CNN and wavelet transforms for predicting
                              the chaotic time series of Chen, Lorenz, Mackey–Glass, and sunspot numbers can
                              also be used for real-time series, such as geomagnetic, network traffic, and weather
                              systems [13,170].
                         •    The forecasting accuracy of an online vehicle velocity prediction approach proposed
                              using adaptive RBFNN can be enhanced using additional data, such as driving time,
                              climate, gas, and brake pedals [176].

                         Author Contributions: Conceptualization, B.R. and K.B.; formal analysis, B.R.; investigation, B.R.;
                         resources, K.B.; data curation, K.B.; writing—original draft preparation, B.R.; writing—review and
                         editing, K.B.; visualization, K.B.; supervision, K.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published
                         version of the manuscript.
                         Funding: This research received no external funding.
                         Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                         Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                         Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
                         Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


                         Abbreviations
                         The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
                         ACF         Auto correlation function
                         ANN         Artificial neural networks
                         AOA         Arithmetic optimization algorithm
                         APE         Absolute percentage error
                         APSK        Amplitude phase shift keying
                         AR          Autoregressive
                         ARE         Average relative error
                         ARIMA       Autoregressive integrated moving average
                         ARMA        Autoregressive moving average
                         ARMSE       Average root mean square error
                         BFA         Bacterial foraging algorithm
                         BP          Backpropagation
                         BPNN        Backpropagation neural network
                         CBAM        Convolutional block attention module
                         CBAS        Chaos beetle antennae search algorithm
                         CCO         Cluster chaotic optimization
                         CGO         Chaos game optimization
                         CMSE        Cumulative mean square error
                         CVRMSE      Coefficient of variance of the root mean square error
                         DCSK        Differential chaos shift keying
                         DMI         Delayed mutual information
                         EKF         Extended Kalman filter
                         EMD         Empirical mode decomposition
                         ESN         Echo state network
                         FFNN        Feed-forward neural network
                         GA          Genetic algorithm
                         GPF         Gaussian particle filtering
                         GRNN        Generalized regression neural network
                         GWO         Grey wolf optimization
                         HBO         Honey bee optimization
                         HEA         Hybrid evolutionary adaptive
                         HFD         Higuchi’s fractal dimension
                         IGWO        Improved grey wolf optimizer
                         ITSM        Improved time series method
                         LLE         Largest Lyapunov exponent
                         LLNF        Locally linear neuro-fuzzy
                         LS          Least square
                         MAD         Mean absolute deviation
                         MAE         Mean absolute error
                         MAPE        Mean absolute percentage error
                         MARE        Mean absolute relative error
                         MCMC        Monte Carlo Markov chain
                         MLE         Machine learning ensembles
                         MLP         Multilayer perceptron
                         MMSE        Minimum mean square error
                         MPSV        Minimum phase space volume
                         MRE         Mean relative error
                         MRFO        Manta ray foraging optimization
                         MRPE        Maximal relative percentage error
                         MSD         Mean squared deviation
                         MSE         Mean squared error
                         MSLE        Mean squared logarithmic error
                         MSPd E      Mean squared prediction error
                         NARX        Nonlinear autoregressive exogenous model
                         NMAE        Normalized mean absolute error
                         NMAPE       Normalized mean absolute percentage error

                                  NMSE        Normalized mean square error
                                  NRMSE       Normalized root mean square error
                                  NWP         Numerical weather prediction
                                  PCR         Principal component regression
                                  PCS         Polynomial chaos surrogates
                                  Pd E        Prediction error
                                  PE          Percentage error
                                  PID         Proportional–integral–derivative
                                  PLS         Partial least square
                                  PRE         Percentage relative error
                                  PSO         Particle swarm optimization
                                  PV          Photovoltaic
                                  QAM         Quadrature amplitude modulation
                                  R           Coefficient of correlation
                                  R2          Coefficient of determination
                                  RBF         Radial basis function
                                  RBFNN       Radial basis function neural network
                                  RE          Relative error
                                  RMSE        Root mean squared error
                                  RNN         Recurrent neural network
                                  RR          Ridge regression
                                  RRMSE       Relative root mean squared error
                                  SA          Simulated annealing
                                  SMAPE       Symmetric mean absolute percentage error
                                  SOM         Self-organizing map
                                  SSA         Salp swarm algorithm
                                  SVM         Support vector machine
                                  TCN         Temporal convolutional network
                                  TLBO        Teaching–learning-based optimization
                                  TTLS        Truncated total least squares
                                  UKF         Unscented Kalman filter
                                  ULN         Universal learning network
                                  YCO         Yield-constrained optimization
