
                     Abstract. Chaotic systems are complex dynamical systems that play a very important role in
                     the study of the atmosphere, aerospace engineering, finance, etc. To improve the accuracy of
                     chaotic time series prediction, this study proposes a hybrid model CEEMDAN-LSTM which
                     combines Complete Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition with Adaptive Noise
                     (CEEMDAN) and long short-term memory (LSTM). In the model, the original time series is
                     decomposed into several intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) and a residual component. To reduce
                     the difficulty of predicting chaotic time series and provide a high level of predictive accuracy,
                     the LSTM prediction model is built for all each characteristic series from CEEMDAN
                     deposition. Finally, the final prediction results are obtained by combining all the prediction
                     sequences. To test the effectiveness of this model we proposed, we examined the CEEMDAN-
                     LSTM model using the Lorenz-63 system. Further compared to Autoregressive Integrated
                     Moving Average (ARIMA ), Support Vector Regression (SVR), multilayer perceptron (MLP),
                     and the single LSTM model, the results of the experiment show that the proposed model
                     performs better in the prediction of chaotic time series. Besides, the hybrid model proposed in
                     this paper has better results than the LSTM model alone. Therefore, hybrid models based on
                     deep learning methods and signal decomposition methods have great potential in the field of
                     chaotic time series prediction.



1. Introduction
The prediction of chaotic systems is one of the most important areas of research in recent years [1,2].
The fundamental characteristic of chaotic systems is their extreme sensitivity to initial values, which
determines the long-term unpredictability of changes in the system, making it impossible to predict
chaotic time series over long periods [3]. However, the certainty of the chaotic system, i.e., the small
degree of dispersion of the motion trajectory in the short term, determines its short-term predictability
[4]. Currently, the prediction of chaotic systems is accomplished in two main ways. One is that over
the years, many scientists have built models of mechanisms such as differential equations by analyzing
the internal laws of natural systems and simplifying the main features of natural systems. This
approach requires a large reserve of expert knowledge. Another approach to prediction is the machine
learning approach based on data-driven, i.e. using historical data sets to build predictive models. In
recent years, deep learning, as a new research direction in the field of machine learning, has gained
significant advantages in different application areas [5-7]. Among the many deep learning models, the
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) introduce the concept of time step length and show greater
adaptability in the analysis of time-series data. Since recurrent neural networks (RNNs) tend to ignore


long-term dependencies within time series and have problems such as gradient explosion, the Long
short-term memory (LSTM) [8], a variant of RNNs, has emerged with a special memory structure and
gate structure that enhances long-term dependent memory. Numerous studies show that Long short-
term memory (LSTM) is an effective method for achieving a chaotic time series prediction [9-11].
Therefore, this paper uses LSTM as a prediction algorithm to construct a chaotic time series prediction
model.
    In recent years, the “decomposition before reconstruction” framework has achieved good results in
many forecasting areas, such as PM2.5 prediction, financial time series prediction, and long-term
streamflow forecasting. Among the many data decomposition methods, the ensemble empirical mode
decomposition (EEMD) inherits the advantages of EMD (empirical mode decomposition) and solves
the problem of mode mixing of EMD, while complete ensemble empirical mode decomposition with
adaptive noise (CEEMDAN) [12] further improves based on EEMD, not only overcoming the problem
of low decomposition efficiency but also the reconstruction error is nearly zero, more suitable for the
decomposition of nonlinear time series. Therefore, in this study, we chose CEEMDAN to decompose
the time series.
    Based on CEEMDAN and LSTM, this paper proposes a hybrid model, which first pre-processes
the chaotic time series through CEEMDAN and then predicts its components through LSTM. The
final forecast is obtained by integrating the component forecasts. We apply this model to predict the
Lorenz-63 system and compare the predicted results with other predictive models. The experimental
results show that the model proposed in this paper is significantly superior in chaotic time series
prediction compared to other models.

2. Proposed Method
Previous studies have found that CEEMDAN has advantages in time series decomposition, while
LSTM does well in the long time series prediction. Therefore, in this paper, we integrated these two
methods and proposed a hybrid approach, so-called CEEMDAN-LSTM, for forecasting chaotic time-
series prediction. The proposed CEEMDAN-LSTM includes three stages: decomposition, individual
forecasting, and ensemble. In the first stage, we use the CEEMDAN method to decompose the original
time series of the chaotic system into 𝑘 + 1 components, including 𝑘 IMF and a residual component.
Of these components, some exhibit high-frequency characteristics while others exhibit low-frequency
characteristics. In the second stage, we build a forecasting model for each component using long short-
term memory (LSTM). Then we use the model built to make predictions for each component. So we
ended up with predictions for different frequency components. In the third stage, we aggregate the
forecast results of all components as the final result. Although there are many ways to aggregate the
forecast results for all components, in this study we add up the forecast results for all components
using equal weights. The flowchart of the CEEMDAN-LSTM is shown in Figure 1.



3.Experiments and Results

3.1 Datasets and Pre-process
To measure and compare the forecasting performance of different models, the chaotic time series of
the Lorenz-63 system is employed as the sample data set for the experiment. Lorenz-63 system
described a model where fluid flows in a container whose top and bottom are cooled, then heated to
create a temperature similar to the atmosphere. Specifically, Lorenz-63 system, which is a set of
coupled ordinary differential equations with three components. The study of the Lorenz-
63 system has important implications for the discovery and understanding of the characteristic
properties of sensitivity to the initial condition for a deterministic system [13,14]. Therefore, the
Lorenz-63 system has been extensively studied as an important prototype for studying the special
properties of chaotic systems. We set the initial state of this chaotic system as x(0) =
−0.2028, y(0) = ,3.5418, z(0) = 25.0873, the time step is 0.01, and the integration time length is 50,
and we finally got 5000 sample data.

3.2 Parameters Details
Our implementation was based on the Tensorflow framework [15]. To prevent the problem of gradient
explosion during training, we made the model training more robust by reducing the learning rate and
increasing the number of batches. The process of model training is to minimize the loss function, so
after defining the loss function, setting up a suitable optimizer to solve the parameter optimization
problem is very important for experimental results. There are a great number of optimization
algorithms to choose from in current deep learning libraries, such as Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD), Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam), and root mean square prop (RMSProp). The ideal
optimizer can not only get the best model as fast as possible with the training samples but also prevent
overfitting. To choose the best optimizer, we have carried out comparative experiments, which
compared the mean squared error (MSE) loss of different optimizers when training the LSTM model.
From comparative experiments, we found that the Adam method is the best. Adam has been widely
used as an effective stochastic optimization method. Therefore, Adam optimizer is used in the process
of training the model, which can converge to good results faster. The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU)
does not have any backpropagation error compared to the sigmoid function. And for larger neural
networks, it is faster to build models based on ReLU. Therefore, when selecting the activation function
in the experiment, we chose ReLU as the activation function. In this study, the input of LSTM is
100 × 1 data. What's more, we applied dropout to the LSTM and set the dropout rate to 0.1 to
prevent overfitting.

3.3 Analysis of Experimental Results
First, the CEEMDAN method is used to decompose the original chaotic time series. The amplitude
and ensemble number of the added noise are 0.4 and 500, respectively. Figure 2 shows the IMFs and
the residual(trend item) of the chaotic time series decomposed by CEEMDAN. The result contains 1
original sequence, 12 IMF components, and 1 trend item.


It can be seen that the original sequence of variable x in the Lorenz-63 system exhibits highly
nonlinear and nonstationary, the fluctuating frequency of the IMF component is gradually reduced
from IMF1 to IMF12. The left of the first line of Figure 2 displays the original chaotic time series of
variable x in the Lorenz-63 system. First, the different LSTM prediction model was built for each of
the 12 IMF components and one trend item respectively, and the forecast results for each component
were obtained. Next, the forecast results for each component were summed with equal weights to
produce the final forecast results for the original variable.
    A prediction result for the lorenz-63 system made by the CEEMDAN-LSTM is shown in Figure 3.
The black dash-dot curves are historical data. The red dots are predictions from the CEEMDAN-
LSTM. The black curves are the true state value of the Lorenz-63 system. As can be seen from Figure
3, based on the historical data of 2 units of Lyapunov time, we can predict the trajectory of about 4
units of Lyapunov time [16-18] using the CEEMD-LSTM prediction model. In other words, with
short-term historical information as input, the CEEMD-LSTM prediction model can predict the
trajectory of chaotic dynamic systems over longer periods.



   According to the specific statistical results, we can find that the model proposed in this paper has a
smaller error in the prediction results and has obvious advantages over other models.

4. Conclusions
To improve the performance of predicting chaotic time series, a hybrid prediction model combining
CEEMDAN and LSTM, called CEEMDAN-LSTM, is proposed in this paper. The method
decomposes a complex chaotic time series into several components using the CEEMDAN method and
then predicts each component separately using an LSTM-based prediction model. In the end, the sum
of the predicted results of all the components is taken as the final forecast result. The results of the
forecasting experiments on the Lorenz-63 system show that the proposed hybrid model outperforms
the other forecasting models in the experiment. From the experimental results, we conclude that the
“Decomposition and ensemble” framework can significantly improve the performance of chaotic time
series prediction. Reasonable decomposition results can significantly improve the forecast
performance, and the choice of CEEMDAN parameters has a significant impact on the forecast results.
Therefore, in future studies, we will focus on how to select reasonable parameters efficiently during
the time series decomposition process.